# Silence

Everyone loves silence, especially when you spent the last two hours patterning a duck sample.

## Event-based silence

- You can use a dot (`.`) inside any pattern to denote a silence.

```python
@swim
def silence_demo(p=0.5, i=0):
    D('bd ...', i=i, d=1)
    D('hh . hh ..', i=i, d=1)
    again(silence_demo, p=1/8, i=i+1)
```
    
  Be careful, the concept of silence in **Sardine** can be pretty confusing. Silence is a very important and complex topic. Adding silences is a great way to generate interesting patterns. Silences are different for each sender because silence doesn&rsquo;t have the same meaning for a sampler, a MIDI output or an OSC output (`D()`, `N()`, etc.).
    
-   `D()`: a silence is the absence of a sample. The event will be skipped.
-   `N()`: a silence is the absence of a note. The event will be skipped.
-   any OSC based Sender: a silence is the absence of an address. The event will be skipped.
    
## Parametric silence

What about the other patterns that live alongside the main pattern? A silence in an auxilliary pattern will cause a **parametric silence** to happen. Take a look at the following example:
    
```python
@swim
def silence_demo(p=0.5, i=0):
    D('sitar', legato='0.5', speed='[1:4] .!8', i=i, d=1)
    again(silence_demo, p=1/8, i=i+1)
```
    
In this example, we always include the sample name in our pattern: `sitar`. There is no **real** silence, only a parametric silence used in the pattern used for the `speed` parameter.

A parametric silence will cause the pattern to search its last value and hold it. **Sardine** will backtrack and search the last value that could have been generated by the pattern. The result of the `speed` parameter will then be `[1 2 3 4 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8]`.

For people familiar with modular synthesizers and analog circuits, this is pretty much the same thing as a **sample & hold** mechanism. Note that it is impossible to write a **parametric silence** composed only of silences. A pattern of nothing is not a pattern. It will crash, and rightfully so.


